[ ♪♪ ]
>> Bob: It is as much a city of
the 19th century or the Cold War
as it is of today.
And through the years,
Moscow has earned its reputation
as an often grey, glum,
occasionally even grim kind
of place, though apparently
not when Donald Trump
came to town.
>> Only one woman in the world
will win and stand out above the
rest to become Miss Universe.
Welcome back to
Miss Universe 2013
coming at you from Moscow.
>> Bob: It was November 2013,
and Trump had brought the
diamond tiara of his
business empire to Russia,
the Miss Universe pageant
in Moscow for the first time
along with Trump's
trademark bluster.
>> President Donald Trump:
Well, this'll be a great one,
there's no question,
because of the fact that
it's Miss Universe in Moscow.
This is going to be maybe the
best we've ever had.
>> Bob: It certainly was one of
the best financially,
reported that the fee paid by
Russian sponsors to bring it
there was over $6 million.
On the big night
on the red carpet,
alongside rock stars,
hockey players, oligarchs and
celebrities was this man known
as one of the most notorious
criminals in the world.
Why he was on Donald Trump's
red carpet raises intriguing
questions about the Russian
connections and the company kept
by the man who would become the
45th American president.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> Bob: Donald Trump has no
problem attracting
colourful people like
Alimzhan Tokhtakhounov.
In Moscow he's known by his
crime name, Little Taiwanese.
He's been a fugitive from US
justice for years for gambling
and money laundering,
bribery and fraud.
In 2008, Forbes Magazine
named him the world's
third most wanted, right after
Osama bin Laden and the
notorious Mexican drug lord,
El Chapo.
[ Cheering ]
>> Bob: And here at the
"Fifth Estate," we have run
across him previously too.
In the late '90s we investigated
the ties between Russian NHLers
and the Russian mob.
Little Taiwanese was one
of the mobsters.
Here, he's shown being honoured
by a Russian fraternity.
After the 2002 Olympics,
we reported how Canadian pairs
figure skaters were cheated out
of a gold medal when a judge
was bribed at the
Salt Lake City games.
Who was accused of
doing the bribing?
You guessed it.
Little Taiwanese was arrested
for that in Italy but fought
extradition and returned
to Moscow.
And then there was this.
In April 2013, FBI agents in
New York raided gamblers
operating out of privately owned
apartments in the Trump towers.
They busted what's been called
the biggest sports book making
operation in the world,
estimated at over $100 million.
Dozens of people were indicted.
But the ringleader
back in Moscow was
Alimzhan Tokhtakhounov,
aka Little Taiwanese.
>> His role in this was sort of
as a guarantor.
You know, he was one of...he was
a Russian mob chieftain.
>> Bob: Veteran journalist
David Corn investigated the part
Little Taiwanese played in the
Trump Tower ring.
>> And if you wanted to have the
sort of operation which used a
lot of Russian oligarch money,
you needed someone
to basically insure it.
And he got paid millions and
millions of dollars according to
to the federal indictment
here in the United States
to provide that
protection service
to this, you know,
this illegal gambling operation.
>> Bob: It was just a few months
later that the Russian mobster,
still under US indictment,
would appear on
Trump's Miss Universe
red carpet.
>> It's some coincidence that a
Russian oligarch mobster who was
part of a gambling ring working
out of Trump Tower would end up
at Trump's beauty pageant.
That's the thing.
I mean, there are lots of
mysterious coincidences
involving Donald Trump
and things Russian.
[ Cheering and Applause ]
>> Bob: Among the mysteries,
Donald Trump's relationship
with Russian President
Vladimir Putin, his own
statements about that raise more
questions than answers.
>> And, of course, the big man
on campus, Donald Trump.
>> Bob: Following the 2013
Miss Universe pageant this is
what Trump said about Putin.
>> President Donald Trump: I was
in Moscow recently,
and I spoke indirectly and
directly with President Putin.
>> Bob: But during the
2016 election campaign,
he essentially said
just the opposite.
>> President Donald Trump:
I never met Putin.
I don't know who Putin is.
>> Bob: And what about this?
17 US intelligence agencies
concluded Russian
computer hacking was
intended to interfere with the
presidential election to
favour Trump, an order by Putin.
Trump would consistently dismiss
those allegations
against Russia.
>> President Donald Trump:
I mean, It could be Russia.
But it could also be China.
It could be lots of
other people.
It also could be somebody
sitting on their bed
that weighs 400 pounds, okay?
>> Bob: But the question
remained, why has Donald Trump
been so unwilling to accept
the word of the intelligence
community he will now
have to work with?
The week before the
inauguration, a possible answer.
>> CNN has learned that the
nation's top intelligence
officials provided information
to President Elect Donald Trump
and to President Barack Obama
last week about claims of
Russian efforts to compromise
President-elect Trump.
>> Bob: That CNN report was the
first the public heard of the
story based on unsubstantiated
claims that Trump may have been
compromised by Russian spies.
But the buzz about it actually
began to circulate in official
Washington months earlier.
The allegations are based on
this 35 page memo
compiled by a former
British intelligence agent,
hired by Trump opponents to find
information damaging to
his presidential bid.
The dossier contains details of
alleged cooperation with the
Russians as well as Trump's
possible exposure to blackmail
because of suspected bugged
phone calls for sexual acts
recorded in hotel rooms.
Again, we emphasize the material
is unverified.
>> I spoke to a number of former
CIA people and security
intelligence people and asked
them, you know, what would have
Russian intelligence have done
if Trump came to Moscow for a
couple of days?
And everybody said,
they obviously would have done
everything they can to spy on
him in any way possible.
>> Bob: Almost three months
before the CNN report,
it actually was
investigative journalist
David Corn who broke the story
in "Mother Jones."
His source now known to be
Christopher Steele, the former
Russia specialist for Britain's
MI6 intelligence service.
He obtained information
suggesting Trump might have been
targeted during that 2013
Miss Universe pageant in Moscow.
>> This person who had
previously spied on Russia for
his own service who had a lot of
good sources in Russia came to
the conclusion from talking to
his sources that for years,
five years or so,
Russian intelligence had an
active program to, as he put it,
coopt or cultivate Donald Trump.
And that can mean a lot
of different things.
It can mean, you know,
creating a partnership
in which they help Trump
and they get something
in return.
Or it could just be
getting Trump to look upon Putin
and Moscow and Russian interests
in a kindly fashion.
>> Bob: Before the election in
August 2016, the FBI met with
the former British spy,
Christopher Steele, in Rome to
discuss that information about
what might have happened to
Donald Trump.
We don't know how much
of it is true, but it seems
a plausible scenario as reported
by David Corn.
>> That his hotel room would
have been bugged.
That where they were, you know,
where they were holding the
pageant would have been bugged.
They would have made every
effort they can to penetrate his
phone and any other equipment,
electronic equipment,
a computer,
anything else he may have used.
>> Bob: Corn tried to confirm
what security measures there
were to protect Trump in Moscow.
>> So I then asked the Trump...
who was now the
Trump transition team,
what precautions
he had taken in 2013.
And they refused to answer
the question.
So it just raises, A, I think,
significant question whether he
was spied upon, and if he was
spied upon does he know it and
is there any material that the
Russians collected that might be
inconvenient for him?
>> President Donald Trump:
I was in Russia years ago
with the Miss Universe contest
which did very well, Moscow,
the Moscow area,
did very, very well.
And I told many people,
be careful because
you don't want to
see yourself on television.
Cameras all over the place.
>> Bob: At his news conference
before inauguration week,
Trump insisted he's always
aware of the security risks.
He even addressed the allegation
he might somehow have been
compromised by alleged
sexual behaviour.
>> President Donald Trump:
Does anyone really believe
that story?
I'm also very much of
a germaphobe, by the way.
[ Laughter ]
Believe me.
[ Cheering ]
>> Bob: True or not, much of the
furore over Trump and Russia has
taken place since the vote.
And for all the attention paid
to Donald Tump now,
during the campaign, it was the
unprecedented scrutiny of
Hillary Clinton, especially by
the FBI, that may well have been
the crucial factor
in the election.
>> Good morning.
>> There were people who had
been working there for
a long time, some stretching
back to the '90s.
Others sort of marinated in the
culture from their superiors or
their colleagues who had
stretched back that long
that sort of said
that Hillary Clinton is guilty
of a crime and we'll find
what that guilt is.
>> President Donald Trump:
She has to go to jail.
[ Cheering ]
>> Everyone: Lock her up!
Lock her up!
[ Crowd Chanting Indistinctly ]
[ ♪♪ ]
[ Cheering and Applause ]
>> Bob: Election night 2016
would not end until the
following morning at 2.49am.
>> President Donald Trump:
Sorry to keep you waiting.
Complicated business,
complicated.
[ Cheering ]
>> Bob: The polls and the
pundits on neither side
saw it coming.
For Donald Trump
and the Republicans,
the thrill of victory.
For Hillary Clinton
and the democrats, it would
be the agony of defeat.
But for both, the same
confounding question, what just
happened and why?
[ ♪♪ ]
>> Bob: The New York landmark
that embodies the 2016
presidential election is
undoubtedly Trump Tower,
until election day,
the signature triumph of
Donald Trump's career.
But a downtown cab ride away is
another institution many believe
played a key role in deciding
the 45th American president.
It is the New York Field Office
of the
Federal Bureau Of Investigation
located in this
Lower Manhattan building.
Not a place you would normally
associate with politics.
But the FBI's part in this most
unusual American election may
have been a crucial one.
>> We have reason to think that
he drove the van into
the World Trade Centre.
>> Bob: And that story begins
here with longtime FBI agent,
James Kallstrom.
At the heart of the bureau's
New York office for
almost three decades, he worked
his way up to assistant director
investigating every kind of
federal crime.
>> All these violent crimes,
drugs, the RICO statute for
major criminal organizations
like the Cosa Nostra, the mafia,
I mean that's what the FBI did.
And I got up every morning
feeling that I was
doing something
for American citizens.
>> Bob: But he didn't have
that same sense of pride
serving under Bill Clinton,
whose behaviour in office
he considered unpresidential
and amoral.
>> You'd be driving down the
street in your car,
and you put on the radio,
news radio,
and you're hearing on there
all about oral sex.
And you have a 12-year-old
ask you,
"Mommy, what's oral sex?"
I mean, it's the president
of the United States.
[ Cheering ]
>> Bob: As president,
Bill Clinton
would face one
FBI investigation after another.
And then there was
his infamous affair with
a White House intern.
>> I did not have sexual
relations with that woman,
Miss Lewinsky.
>> Bob: As Kallstrom navigated
the ranks of the FBI, one of his
colleagues was then US attorney,
Rudy Giuliani, a future
New York mayor and
another member of the federal
law enforcement brotherhood.
The two would remain friends for
the next two decades.
By 2016, the Clinton name was
still anathema to the FBI
in New York,
only this time, the presidential
candidate was Hillary.
By now, Rudy Giuliani's law firm
represented the 13,000 members
of the FBI Agents Association.
>> There is a really significant
lineage and history in
connection between
the New York Field Office
and Rudy Giuliani.
>> Bob: Spencer Ackerman is
US National Security Editor
for the British newspaper
"The Guardian".
He says enmity at the FBI in
New York only increased
when Hillary Clinton seemed
destined for the White House.
>> There were people who had
been working there for
a long time, some stretching
back to the '90s,
others sort of marinated in the
culture from their superiors or
their colleagues who had
stretched back that long
that sort of said that
Hillary Clinton is guilty
of a crime and
we'll find what that guilt is.
>> Bob: And trying to do that,
this would be the catalyst.
[ Gunshot ]
[ ♪♪ ]
>> Bob: 2012, Islamic militants
storm an American diplomatic
compound in Benghazi, Libya,
killing the ambassador
and three others.
Republicans blamed
President Obama and then
Secretary Of State Clinton for
not defending their diplomats.
They called it a coverup.
Benghazi would trigger the first
Hillary Clinton investigation.
Many FBI agents are ex military.
So it was a sensitive subject.
For Jim Kallstrom, it also was
personal because one Benghazi
victim was a family friend.
>> I have known that kid since
he was this high and this high.
And for her to stand in front of
those people, the coffins are 50
feet away with the flags
on them...that is an outrage.
>> Bob: An outrage to some.
But in the end,
the congressional committee
investigating Benghazi found no
wrongdoing by Hillary Clinton.
It did, however, stumble on
something potentially even
bigger that struck
like a time bomb.
>> I did not e-mail any, um,
classified material to anyone
on my e-mail.
There is no
classified materials.
>> Bob: In March 2015,
it emerged that while
Secretary Of State Clinton
had used a personal
e-mail server for
official correspondence,
a possible violation of
national security.
Despite her denials,
both the state department
and intelligence community
ruled she did indeed
receive classified e-mail.
The FBI was assigned
Hillary Clinton
investigation number two.
And there was more bad news
to come.
The timing couldn't be worse.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> Bob: It started with,
of all things,
a book called "Clinton Cash"
which purported to prove
Bill and Hillary Clinton
were getting rich from their
family charity,
the Cilnton Foundation.
"Clinton Cash" was the
brain child of Steve Bannon,
the man behind the
Alt right, some say sexist,
racist and xenophobic,
website called "Breitbart News".
Bannon ran Donald Trump's
election campaign and is now his
chief White House strategist.
>> Bannon is the guy that
all the roads kind of lead back
to at the beginning.
So he is someone who as
long as two or three years ago
had mapped out
a plan for how to deny
Hillary Clinton the White House.
>> Bob: Joshua Green is a
reporter with Bloomberg News
who says Bannon's plan
was audacious,
target Hillary Clinton not on
right wing fringe websites but
through the mainstream media.
>> Collecting facts about who
she's taking money from, who the
Clinton Foundation is
associating with, what foreign
governments they're taking money
from and propositioning and what
kinds of conflicts of interest
that poses.
>> Bob: There was no direct
evidence of wrongdoing, but that
didn't stop the FBI.
The "Clinton Cash" book was
still enough for agents
in New York
to launch Hillary Clinton
investigation number three
into the Clinton Foundation.
But apparently there were doubts
higher up.
And the Justic Department
ordered the investigation
discontinued for lack
of evidence.
That didn't sit well
with Jim Kallstrom
and others at the FBI.
>> There's enough smoke
in there.
There's enough probable cause in
there to conduct
a RICO investigation.
That should be ongoing.
You know, the optics of that was
just outrageous.
>> Well, our next guest not only
says folks at the FBI are upset
with the way this Clinton
investigation was handled.
>> Bob: Now retired, former
assistant FBI Director Kallstrom
traded his badge for a bullhorn,
as a commentator for Fox News,
and if the New York FBI had been
reined in, Kallstrom had not.
>> So you say, you know,
that actually this blows
Watergate away in your view,
what the Clintons have done,
what Hillary has done.
Why?
I mean, get specific on that?
>> Well, the pay for play.
I mean, the foundation
that gives less than
6% of the money to charity.
>> Bob: In fact, that is
completely untrue.
The Clinton Foundation gets high
marks from US charity watchdogs.
But that wasn't the story told
by Trump supporters
or Trump himself.
>> President Donald Trump:
This corruption is just one
more reason why I will ask my
attorney general to appoint a
special prosecutor.
[ Cheering and Applause ]
>> President Donald Trump:
She has to go to jail.
[ Cheering and Applause ]
>> Bob: The lack of proof
notwithstanding, the narrative
of a corrupt Clinton Foundation
compounded by the e-mail scandal
resonated with many
American voters.
>> Lock her up!
>> Bob: "Lock her up,"
"Crooked Hillary,"
"Hillary for prison,"
were bite-sized staples
of Trump rhetoric.
And it was all reenforced by
powerful Conservative voices
like Rudy Giuliani.
>> And finally she destroyed
34,000 e-mails.
Do you know what I argue as a
prosecutor in court?
That's evidence of
the guilty knowledge.
>> Bob: In the FBI, there were
two forces about to collide.
At the top levels, the longheld
tradition of remaining above
politics and beneath the
momentum gathering against
Hillary Clinton, especially in
the New York office, known to
some as "Trump-land"
according to journalist
Spencer Ackerman.
>> In Washington, also a lot of
antipathy towards Clinton, um,
somewhat more nuanced,
as I understand it,
than in New York.
New York, very much a hotbed
of anti Clinton sentiment.
>> Bob: Until July 2016,
FBI director James Comey had
been considered non-partisan,
a straight shooter interested in
getting the facts,
just the facts.
That is, until this.
>> Good morning.
I'm here to give you an update
on the FBI's investigation of
Secretary Clinton's use of a
personal e-mail system during
her time as Secretary Of State.
>> Bob: It was an extraordinary
occurrence, not only
the FBI commenting on
a sensitive investigation,
but then Director Comey
concluding there should be no
charges against Hillary Clinton.
>> Our judgement is that
no reasonable prosecutor
would bring such a case.
>> Joining me now with more,
James Kallstrom,
former Assistant Director
in charge of the FBI...
>> Bob: Comey's announcement
triggered a firestorm of
condemnation from the right
and within the FBI.
>> Yeah, I did.
I have defended him in the past,
but those days are over, Megyn.
>> Were they upset about the
fact they were political pawns
that were thrown under the bus?
Yeah.
I'm sure they were.
I mean, I was told that the
agents would turn their back
when he walked down the halls.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> For Hillary Clinton for the
time being, things seemed to be
going her way, the three federal
investigations all had ended
with no judgement against her.
And finally the spotlight was
about to be turned
onto Donald Trump.
It was all just a month
and a day before the US
election when this video
went viral.
Trump caught on a live
mic before a TV show bragging
about sex with women
not his wife.
[ Laughter ]
>> The Republican candidate is
facing increasing backlash.
>> He then grabbed my shoulder
and he then kissed me again
very aggressively and placed
his hand on my breast.
>> At least four women
have now come forward
accusing Donald Trump
of improper behaviour.
>> Bob: And after the tale of
the tape, the polls
began to shift.
Hillary Clinton surged ahead.
Pundits predicted the election
would be hers.
[ Cheering and Applause ]
>> Bob: Jim Kallstrom,
former FBI agent
and marine, had been morally
offended by both Bill and
Hillary Clinton.
Now he pleaded for his
candidate, Donald Trump.
>> Please, you women out there,
if you want change,
vote for Donald Trump.
Put this other stuff aside.
>> Bob: The Trump camp
seemed desperate.
But then, on October 25th,
Rudy Giuliani began hinting at
something big that could swing
momentum back to Trump.
>> And then I think he's got
a surprise or two that
you're going to hear about
in the next few days.
I mean, I'm talking about some
pretty big surprises.
>> I heard you say that
this morning.
What do you mean?
>> You will see.
>> Stay tuned.
>> Bob: Three days later a
surprise would come from none
other than the FBI.
>> 11 days to the election,
the FBI director informing
lawmakers he is reviewing new
e-mails related to the Clinton
e-mail investigation.
>> Bob: Perhaps looking over
his shoulder, after hostility in
FBI ranks when
he cleared Clinton,
perhaps because he
feared news of the new e-mails
would leak out anyway,
Comey went public again writing
to congress about the newly
discovered e-mails.
>> Longstanding, decades long
Justice Department procedures
hold that the FBI does not get
involved in a contentious
election, certainly not
a presidential election.
Comey decided to do that twice.
That is, for whatever reason,
a momentous political decision
made by the head of the FBI.
>> James Comey believed that if
he got out ahead
of this and said,
"This is what the story is.
It's not an investigation,"
that he would contextualize it
and frame it accurately.
And, you know, the lesson,
at least in hindsight,
is, you know, if you let
a bull out of the corral,
you can't necessarily
hold onto the horns and direct
where it goes.
>> President Donald Trump:
She has no right
to be running.
You know that.
>> Bob: In the final days of the
campaign, Comey's letter was a
red flag to that bull.
Sexual assault stories about
Trump disappeared,
the headlines all about the
Clinton investigation.
>> Still under investigation.
>> She is now on the ropes.
She's on the defence.
He's got the momentum.
And everybody in this country
knows, finally after four
decades of Clinton corruption,
the American people have figured
out she's a crook.
>> Bob: The scene was set.
On November 8th, Hillary Clinton
won the popular vote.
But the crucial
Electoral College
and the presidency
would go to Donald Trump.
The presidential election of
2016 finally was settled.
And it didn't take long for
Trump to bring Russia back into
the conversation.
>> President Donald Trump
If Putin likes Donald Trump,
I consider that an asset,
not a liability.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> If you have any doubt at all
that Hillary Clinton is the
illuminati's candidate...
>> Ever since this video emerged
questions about Clinton's health
have been raised across the
United States.
>> In fact, Hoff photographed
Clinton with two
of his bunny ranch girls.
>> Bob: You may not
have watched it.
But RT or "Russia Today"
broadcasts around the world
funded by the Kremlin.
And if it's the voice of the
Kremlin, Vladimir Putin is not
only de facto managing editor
but often also leading man.
>> It's your divorce everybody
has been talking about.
>> Bob: We now know that along
with computer hacking, RT was
part of the Russian
disinformation campaign
that US intelligence
says was intended
to interfere with and undermine
the presidential election.
RT featured regular attacks on
Putin's hated rival,
Hillary Clinton, according to
former anchor Liz Wahl.
>> I mean, for political
reasons, Vladimir Putin is not a
fan of Hillary Clinton, did not
want her to get elected.
And you can see it very clearly
reflected in the headlines that
Russia was rooting for,
Russian media was
rooting for Donald Trump
eventually and just this
total demonization of Clinton.
>> Putin says he doesn't
know Trump and has no reason
to criticize him.
>> Bob: RT's lineup is always
Putin-centric and
recently Trump friendly too.
>> President Donald Trump:
I have absolutely no opinion
on that.
>> Bob: Like trump himself
speaking on his old pal
Larry King's show on RT.
>> US intelligence
and law enforcement agencies
reportedly are investigating
whether Russia launched a
covert operation to disrupt
the 2016 election.
What do you make of that?
>> President Donald Trump:
I think it's probably unlikely.
I think maybe the democrats are
putting that out.
Who knows?
>> Bob: But the coziness wasn't
was bothered Liz Wahl.
It was the lying on TV.
>> I think around the time of
Ukraine is when it kind of
emerged and became more
aggressive and shameless in
manipulating the truth and
twisting the facts.
>> Bob: As Russian troops poured
into Ukraine, Wahl had to report
they weren't there.
It was too much for her.
>> Personally, I cannot be
a part of network funded
by the Russian government
that whitewashes the
actions of Putin.
I'm proud to be an American and
believe in disseminating
the truth.
And that is why, after this
newscast, I'm resigning.
>> Bob: Talk TV is one thing.
But something stranger was
happening on the US
campaign trail.
>> President Donald Trump:
Russia, if you're listening,
I hope you're able to find the
30,000 e-mails that are missing.
>> Bob: The mysterious
relationship between Russia and
Trump raised many eyebrows
during the election.
But at least publicly, the FBI
didn't seem too concerned.
In contrast, Hillary Clinton was
subjected to three separate
federal investigations.
>> There was an obsession with
it that didn't match any
on the Trump side, there was no
obsession with his conflicts
of interest, with his mob ties,
with any of this
Russian business,
with the Russian hacking.
>> Bob: But even after the FBI
director intervened publicly
during the election twice
about the bureau's
investigations into Hillary
Clinton, this is what James
Comey said when asked if the FBI
now is investigating Russia
and the election.
>> You didn't say one way or
another whether there's an
investigation underway.
>> That's correct.
Especially in a public forum, we
never confirm or deny an
impending investigation.
>> The irony of your making that
statement here, I cannot avoid.
But I'll move on.
>> Well, we sometimes think
differently about closed
investigations.
>> Bob: Now that he's president,
Donald Trump's relationship with
Russia will be put
in the spotlight.
>> President Donald Trump:
Well, if Putin likes
Donald Trump, I consider
that an asset, not a liability.
>> I think that he thinks that
he's going to be able to
manipulate or manage Trump.
>> Bob: Journalist Masha Gessen
had to flee Putin's Russia for
New York.
She's observed both men and says
among the similarities between
them is a disregard for facts
and the truth.
>> They both lie.
And that's been well documented.
But I think what's less
understood is that they don't
lie in order to avoid telling
the truth.
They lie in order to assert
their power over reality.
It's a bully tactic.
It's the sort of "I'm going to
say whatever I please.
I assert my right to say
whatever I please.
And what are you going to do
about it?"
>> Bob: In the end, Masha Gessen
says, it won't be the lies
Donald Trump tells that really
matter but what he does as the
45th president of the US.
Everything that we need to know
in terms of Trump's danger to
the world is out in the open.
It's in his tweets.
It's in his campaign statements.
It's in his statements during
the debates.
And it's plenty worrisome
on its own.
You don't need a conspiracy
theory to worry more.